# SimBricks Website

This is the main repo for the SimBricks webpage. It's built using the
[Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) static website generator. Gitlab CI on this
repository is set up so that the newest version is automatically deployed.

Editing and testing locally requires working jekyll setup. To make this as
simple as possible, the repo contains a devcontainer configuration. If you have
vscode set up with the docker plugin, then all you need to do is open the cloned
repo, and then click the "re-open in container" button, and vscode will do the
rest.

To test, run `jekyll serve --lsi` which will start a webserver on
`http://localhost:4000` and automatically recompile as you make changes.


## Directory Structure
 * `_data/`: YAML source files for structured data
  + `navigation.yml`: Links in the navigation menu at the top of the page.
  + `news.yml`: News items for front page.
  + `people.yml`: People info for people page and elsewhere.
  + `publications.yml`: Publications for pubs page and elsewhere.
 * `_projects/`: Markdown files for individual projects, front-matter contains
   necessary meta data.
 * `_pages/`: Markdown files for individual pages, front-matter contains
   necessary meta data.
 * `_sass/` [SASS](https://sass-lang.com/) source files for our CSS. There is a
   number of common files and then some that are specfic for individual layouts.
  + `base.scss` is the main file that imports everything else.
  + `normalize.scss` is a [helper](https://github.com/necolas/normalize.css) to
    provide common defaults across different browsers.
  + `fonts.scss` imports the necessary font files (generated by google fonts).
  + `base-layout.scss`: Layout for the site skeletton used across all pages.
  + `base-design.scss`: Desing pieces for the site skeletton.
  + `slick.scss`: CSS components for the
    [Slick slider](http://kenwheeler.github.io/slick/) we use for news.
  + The remaining `.scss` files are specfic for individual layouts.
 * `_layouts/`: HTML layouts (templates for different pages).
  + `base.html`: The overall page skeleton, all other layouts extend this.
  + `default.html`: basic default page layout if nothing else is specified.
  + The rest are used for individual pages as specified by the `layout:`
    parameter in the page front matter.
 * `assets/`: Static files that are directly included in the generated page.
  + `images/`: Images
    - `flags/`: Flag icons
    - `people/`: Profile pictures
    - `projects/`: Project logos
 * `_config.yml`: Main Jekyll config file.


## Common Changes

### Adding / Modifying a Person

1. Start by editing `_data/people.yml`. If adding a new person you can copy from
   another one as a starting point. Make sure to choose a unique key, as this
   will be used elsewhere for referencing the person. Keep entries sorted by
   category and then alphabetically.
2. Add a profile picture to `assets/images/people/`. Use the key as the
   filename, PNG format. In `people.yml` specify the file name (without path or
   extension) in the `img` parameter.
3. Add the person to any relevant projects, by editing the project markdown and
   adding them to the `people` list.


### Adding / Modifying a Project

1. Create a new Markdown file in the `_projects`. Use lowercase as the page
   name. This will also be the key in case the project gets referenced
   elsewhere. You can use `simbricks.md` as a template to see the full
   front-matter meta data. At least the title and list of people must be
   specified.
2. Add the project logo (SVG unless there is absolutely no alternative) to
   `assets/images/projects/`. Then specify the relative logo path in the images
   folder (e.g. `projects/simbricks.svg) using the `logo` key in the markdown
   file.
3. If applicable add publications.

**Caution:** Be careful when renaming projects. Ideally only change the project
title, and leave the short name (file name) as it is. If you do change the file
name, please make sure to **update all links**, including from publications and
news!

### Adding / Modifying Publications

Edit `_data/publications.yml`. Keep entries sorted with newest ones on top, but
keep in-progress entres on top. Use a unique key for each entry. When specfying
authors, be sure to use `internal` with the person key for authors in the group.
Additionally add everone to the `people` list.


## External Resources Used
 * The fonts in `assets/fonts` were retrieved based on links from
   [Google Fonts](https://fonts.googleapis.com/css2?family=Alegreya+Sans&family=Exo+2:wght@200;300;400;600&display=swap)
   on August 14, 2023.
 * For the news we use the [Slick slider](http://kenwheeler.github.io/slick/)
 * We use [flag icons](https://github.com/lipis/flag-icons) version 6.7.0 on the
   people page.
 * We use [fontawesome](https://fontawesome.com/) version 6.4.2 for other icons.
