---
title: "The Need for End-To-End Evaluation"
subtitle: |
  Why should you care about end-to-end evaluation in simulation?
  How can SimBricks help you conduct end-to-end evaluations?
date: 2024-06-24
author: marvin
permalink: /blog/need-for-e2e-evaluation.html
card_image: /assets/images/blog/technical-overview.jpg
---

In our previous blog post we had a look at how SimBricks enables modular full
system simulation. By combining different best-of-breed simulators, SimBricks
effectively allows for end-to-end evaluation in simulation. But why should one
care about full system simulations instead of simulating only specific parts of
the system in isolation? This post will shed a light on when and why you should
care about end-to-end evaluation in contrast to isolated simulation.


# Full System Simulation Provides the Whole Picture
When we look at modern computer systems, we see that they consist of many
interconnected components. For example, CPUs might be connected to memory,
NICs, GPUs, and much more. Networks are naturally highly interconnected systems
that consist of a large number of different components. And the trend towards
even more interconnected systems is continuing with the advent of new
technologies such as disaggregated memory. This means that individual components
rarely operate completely detached from the rest of the system. Instead, a
decisive factor for the behavior and performance of the component is often how
it interacts with other components. For example, if we develop a new accelerator
that is connected via PCIe, it is of no benefit if the accelerator can perform
calculations quickly and efficiently, but cannot communicate efficiently with
the rest of the system. In this case, the interface to the rest of the system
becomes a bottleneck and prevents the accelerator from reaching its true
potential. Therefore, only if we look at all the components involved can we get
a meaningful evaluation of the system.


# Current Simulators Are Not Enough
Current simulators only simulate certain parts of an entire system. There is no
simulator that can simulate **all** components in detail. If we look at the
network simulator [ns-3](https://www.nsnam.org/), for example, we can see that
it can simulate the behavior of a network well, but only uses a very abstract,
functional model for the hosts. Many aspects of the host systems are not
modeled, even though they can have a noticeable effect on the performance of the
entire system. We therefore use SimBricks to simulate each relevant component in
detail with best-of-breed simulators. This allows us to perform actual
end-to-end evaluation in simulation.


//TODO add figure


# End-To-End Evaluation Makes a Difference
To show that end-to-end simulation can make a difference, let's look at an
experiment we conducted in our paper. In this experiment we compared dctcp
congestion control behavior in the ns-3 network simulator to a physical testbed
and an end-to-end simulation using SimBricks. We set up two clients and two
servers sharing a single 10Gbps bottleneck link with a MTU of 4000 bytes, and
one large TCP flow generated by iperf for each client-server pair. In the case
of SimBricks, we use a combination of gem5, ns-3 and an Intel i40e NIC simulator
to simulate hosts, network and NICs in detail. The exact setup can be seen in
the figure above on the left. The graph on the right shows the throughput for
varying dctcp marking thresholds K. The marking threshold balances queuing
latency and throughput; a lower threshold reduces queue length but risks
under-utilizing links. Ns-3 underestimates the necessary threshold to achieve
line rate, as it does not model host processing variations, particularly
processing delay caused by OS interrupt scheduling. However, SimBricks uses gem5
for a detailed simulation of the host and is actually able to capture host
processing variations resulting in measurements that more closely match
with those of the physical testbed. We can conclude that only an
end-to-end evaluation of the full system captures such intricacies.


We hope that we have been able to convince you that you should conduct
end-to-end evaluations using full system simulations. If you have any question:
